At the World Medical Innovation Forum this week, participants were polled with a loaded question: “Do you think healthcare will become better or worse from the use of AI?”
As a case in point, outside of the array of MDs and medical professionals presenting at the forum, there was clearly a strong, advanced technology thread weaved throughout the conversations of the traditional topics of pathology, radiology, bioinformatics, electronic medical records (EMR), and standard healthcare provider issues.
As an example, a panel of senior technology experts from Microsoft, Cisco Systems, Dell EMC, Qualcomm, and Google joined research and information officers from Partners Healthcare and Massachusetts General Hospital to discuss the challenges in what they called “Data Engineering in Healthcare: Liberating Value.” That is a serious title for a panel.
The challenges of discussing how to best build a “marketplace” and healthcare data exchanges and how to integrate “data marts” with existing EMR systems was obvious.
In addition to the panel on technology, Jensen Huang, co-founder and chief executive officer at Nvidia, joined Keith Dreyer, the chief data science officer at Partners Healthcare and a professor of radiology.
Huang was also keen to point out, as far as he is concerned, “AI is software coupled with your data strategy which then writes new software by itself.”
Nvidia spends more than $1 billion in research and development each year with over 3,000 engineers working on AI in its autonomous driving division, and the company is investing heavily into “software that writes software.” The overarching aim for Huang is to “augment humans,” to provide AI and integrated computational systems to enable the species to make better decisions based on ever more complex data, to effectively turn them into “super human.” To be clear, the entire field of medical AI is an inordinately high stakes game, vast budgets with the potential for massive disruption.
Here at The Next Platform, we were unclear, was it about remote imaging, was it about retrofitting older radiology systems, was it some new software, was it about computing in the clinic?
When asked Powell how Nvidia would not end up directly competing with existing medical device providers, they were clear to point out that Nvidia is partnering with the CEOs of the traditional medical heavyweights, and reiterated the quote from Huang by saying that the domain experts are effectively “teaching” the devices to be experts, with the devices then having sophisticated software to insulate the teacher from the underlying computational complexity.
Powell was also keen to point out that while this looks like a “cloud offering”, the federal requirements for on premise and data security issues are forcing that the same software using the Nvidia GPU Cloud repository to also be installed inside the walls of the institute.
Once we looked closer at Project Clara, it is essentially all the tricks we have learned since being able to virtualize compute are now also being applied to advanced systems to effectively build new “virtual medical devices”.
